# Specification for Program to calculate ## Australian Hang Gliding National Ladder### OverviewThe purpose of this document is to provide a brief of requirements to enable the costing for a tender to provide a software program that will enable the automated open calculation of the scores for a National Ladder ranking of Australian pilots for use to determine a National Champion in the various categories of competition, and for selection of a National Team prior to a prospective Worlds Competition. In the past, this has been done in an excel format and has proved to be arduous and erroneous in preparation of a result. It has also proven to be non-flexible to cater for changes in the competition rules, which occurs time-to-time as the sport develops.### The Competition ManualTenders need to be acquainted with parts of the Competition Manual. The Competition Manual sets out the standards and rules for the way competitions are run and how they are scored. A copy is attached with this submission for information and reference. For the purpose of this tender the tenderer only needs to be acquainted with the parts that refer to the scoring system.The current version of the Competition Manual is Edition 6.8 Draft G.Tenderers are specifically requested to become familiar with the requirements of the following:•	Sub-Section 3.2 ‘Requirements for Sanction of Competitions’, •	Section 7 National Ladders, •	Section 8 Pilot Grading, and •	Section 9 National Teams Selection.Processes in calculating the National Ladder in previous Excel based calculationsTo better understand how the Program is to work, it should be useful to understand the processes that a scorer has previously gone through in order to determine the outcome. This process is long and exhaustive and has many peculiarities contained within it. A Program to simplify and quicken the process is requested in the tender submission. A minimum proposal is requested in this Specification, however, if there are alternative or additional processes that can be included then this will be examined in the tender evaluation process.A copy of the Excel spreadsheet entitled ‘National Ladder 2014’ is attached for reference. Examine this spreadsheet in conjunction with the following process description.The steps traditionally undertaken in calculating the National Ladder are as follows:1.	Individual Competition Results tabs: Tabs are created in Excel, which contain each competition result for the past 3 years of calculable sanctioned competitions. 2.	Note the columns and data and the format that has been added. The important relevant information relevant to the scorer has been included, such as, the Pilots name, his place in that competition, his competition result score, his/her gender, country of representation, model and class of glider flown in that competition, and finally the pilot’s ‘ladder score’ in red. This information is relevant to the scorer in determining the overall champions in their category including male and female open class champions, Sports Class champion, and Floater Class champion, etc.3.	The results are first sourced from the FAI website where the results from each competition results are officially lodged. The website can be found at http://www.fai.org/events/events-calendar-and-results. Note that some of the lower ranked competitions are not included in the FAI website but are regarded as scores in the National Ladder. These results are added separately.  4.	The sanction ranking for each competition is added, ie. AAA, AA, A, B, C rankings. The points awarded to the highest ranked ‘AAA’ competition are 450 points. ‘AA’ and other competitions are ranked 20% less than the previous higher ranking. Therefore points are awarded as follows:•	AAA – 450 points •	AA – 360 points•	A – 288 points•	B – 230 points•	C – 184 points5.	Note that in Australian run competitions the maximum number of points awarded is given to the highest scored ‘Australian’ pilot. A formula is given to this pilot to ensure this outcome and based upon his official score from the competition. This formula is then used for all other pilots score and reduces in proportion to that pilots official score. Note that international pilots are not given a score and their corresponding boxes are blank. (Corresponding with rule in Section … of the Competition Manual. Refer tab ‘Canungra 2014’ for reference).6.	Further to the above, note that points scored for Australians participating in Internationally run competitions are calculated differently. Firstly, all internationally sanctioned competitions have a maximum ranking of AA therefore can only afford a maximum of 360 points. Secondly, the maximum number of points is awarded to the highest scored ‘international’ pilot (not the highest ranked ‘Australian’ pilot). A formula is given to this pilot’s official result and the corresponding points for the Australian pilot is calculated based upon the highest scored international pilot. All other international pilot scores are blank. (Corresponding with rule in Section … of the Competition Manual. Refer tab ‘Brit Nats’ for reference).7.	Ladder scores from competitions that occurred 2 years previous are devalued by 20%. And ladder scores from competitions that occurred 3 years previous are devalued by a further 20%. (Corresponding with rule in Section … of the Competition Manual. Refer tabs ‘Canungra 2013’ and ‘Canungra 2012’ for reference)8.	National Ladder ‘Date’ tab: This tab is generated from all of the Individual Competition Results tabs. Firstly, all of the competing Australian pilots (only) are listed together with their corresponding results from the competitions in which they were scored.9.	Note the columns and data and the format that has been added. The important relevant information relevant to the scorer has been included, such as, the Pilots name, his place in National Ladder, his National Ladder place, model of glider flown in open class, class category, and importantly the highest 3 competition points scored in the previous three years of competitions (highlighted) together with the name of the competition, the score and his place. 10.	The following tabs (tab ‘Q’ onwards) list all the sanctioned competitions and the scores each pilot achieved from each competition together with the name of the competition and the place. The sanctioned competitions are listed with the most recent first and the first competition of the third year last (ie. in descending order chronologically). These cells were linked to the results in the individual completion tabs (and then overwritten by hand as the links were broken during saving).11.	From these tabs the process involved identifying the highest top 3 competitions each pilot scored in the 3 years of competitions, to highlight them, and then to copy the details of them to columns ‘G to O’ in chronological order.12.	The points from these top 3 competitions were then totaled in Column B which became the pilots total score to determine his order in the National Ladder. 13.	All columns were then ‘filtered’ and rearranged in Column B in descending order. The topmost ranked pilot with the highest number of points was then awarded top of the National Ladder and the prize of overall Australian National Champion.14.	The class of pilot (and glider) was added in Column F, which identified ‘Open Class’, Women’s Open Class, Kingpost Class, Women’s Kingpost Class, Floater Class, and finally, Class 2. This is done manually after reviewing the various models and classes flown over the previous 3 years by the individual pilot.15.	Web Format tab: This tab is generated from National Ladder ‘Date’ tab and linked directly to the content in that tab. The page generated from this tab is used as the official National Ladder score and will be added to the HGFA web site for all pilots to access and view their current ranking on the National Ladder.Software Program to calculate National LadderA software program is requested to calculate the National Ladder from an Excel list of all competition results, as a minimum.It is acknowledged that it may be impossible for a program to create a result from the beginning of the above process to the end web based output. However, the most onerous, difficult and time-consuming part of the whole process is from steps 8 to step 13 inclusive above. It is proposed that a Scorer prepares an Excel spreadsheet comprising all the results from all competitions over the 3-year period (similar to the Individual Competitions tabs) , and then apply a program that calculates the National Ladder in an automated process. If the web based format version can be generated, this would be advantageous. The final steps of awarding awards to the various Classes of pilots/gliders could be done manually (Steps 14 & 15), however, transparency of the calculations is required to assist with selection and also to ‘check’ the program has worked satisfactorily.If the software program can do more than this, this would be an advantage, but is not necessary. It is understood that the whole process can be automated in Excel. This has been tried and failed, and takes too much time to set up. A faster process is required. Format of ProgramCommand Line would be acceptable however, Forms would be advantageous but may not be necessary. Provide as a minimum a simple way of putting in inputs referencing source files which contain the data (competition results). Requirements for outputs could be HTML files. In addition an output such as csv files should be able to be provided  GitHub.com – Source files (request Code in Source Control as a public repository is sufficient as HGFA optional)Writye documents as a text file. Source Cntrol